Add initial documentation about widget communication (#721)
napari/docs: docs/plugins/advanced_topics/widget_communication.md

(widget-communication)=

## Widget communication

Sometimes complex workflows require access to other docked widgets, information from other plugins, which may be created by other developers.

## Access another plugin widget with `viewer.window.add_plugin_dock_widget`

If a desired plugin widget is already docked in the viewer, 
calling the `add_plugin_dock_widget` method will return the existing widget instance.
If the desired widget is absent, it will be created and added to the viewer.
`add_plugin_dock_widget` is the most convenient way to access a plugin widget that is required by your plugin.

## Access a widget by name with `viewer.window.dock_widgets`

If access a target widget, but without creating it, use the `dock_widgets` property.

> The `dock_widgets` provide access to read-only mapping of all docked widgets in the viewer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the goal is to access a target widget, without creating a widget, use the `dock_widgets` property.
The `dock_widgets` property provides access to a read-only mapping of all docked widgets in the viewer.
```

This method returns the widget itself, not the `QtViewerDockWidget` wrapper.

*The `dock_widgets` property was added in napari 0.6.2.*

## Widget name 

> When widget is added to the viewer as plugin contribution (by using a menu or `add_plugin_dock_widget`), it is assigned a name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a widget is added to the viewer via a plugin contribution (by using a menu or `add_plugin_dock_widget`), it is assigned a name.
```

The name is created by concatenating the widget `display_name` from the plugin manifest and the plugin name in parentheses, like this: `"Widget name (plugin_name)"`. Note: this is the same name that is shown in the napari menus and the title bar of the widget.

```{important}
We don't recommend using the `viewer.window._dock_widgets` attribute to access `QtViewerDockWidget` widgets. This is a private, internal API and may stop working on any release. Please use the above described public API instead.
```

## Shared state between widgets

> If you need for multiple widgets to share a state, you can use a shared global object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a need for multiple widgets to share a state, you can use a shared global object.
```

(widget-communication)=

> # Accessing docked widgets

Reviewer 2: Move to level ## and make title `# Widget communication`

Author: ```suggestion
## Widget communication
```

> Sometimes more complex workflows require access to other docked widgets, sometimes from other plugins, created by other developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes complex workflows require access to other docked widgets, information from other plugins, which may be created by other developers.
```

> ## Accessing plugin widgets `viewer.window.add_plugin_dock_widget`
> 
> If a plugin widget is already docked in the viewer, 
> calling the `add_plugin_dock_widget` method will return the existing widget instance.
> 
> This is the most convenient way to access a plugin widget that is required by your plugin.
> Because if the widget is absent, it will be created and added to the viewer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Access another plugin widget with `viewer.window.add_plugin_dock_widget`

If a desired plugin widget is already docked in the viewer, 
calling the `add_plugin_dock_widget` method will return the existing widget instance.
If the desired widget is absent, it will be created and added to the viewer.
`add_plugin_dock_widget` is the most convenient way to access a plugin widget that is required by your plugin.
```

> ## Accessing widget by name `viewer.window.get_dock_widget`
> 
> If you need to access a widget, but without creating it, you can use the `get_dock_widget` method.
> The `get_dock_widget` method allows you to retrieve a docked widget by its name.
> 
> This method returns the `QtViewerDockWidget` associated with the widget, or `None` if the widget is not found.
> 
> To access the original widget, you can use the `inner_widget` method of the `QtViewerDockWidget`.
> 
> This method allows accessing non-plugin widgets added to viewer using the `add_dock_widget` method.
> 
> 
> *The `get_dock_widget` and `inner_widget` were added in napari 0.6.2.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Access a widget by name with `viewer.window.get_dock_widget`

If access a target widget, but without creating it, use the `get_dock_widget` method.
The `get_dock_widget` method returns a docked widget by its name.

This method returns the `QtViewerDockWidget` associated with the widget, or `None` if the widget is not found or does not exist.

To access the target widget, you can use the `inner_widget` method of the `QtViewerDockWidget`.

This method allows accessing non-plugin widgets added to viewer using the `add_dock_widget` method.

*The `get_dock_widget` and `inner_widget` were added in napari 0.6.2.*
```

## Widget name 

When widget is added to the viewer as plugin contribution (by using a menu or `add_plugin_dock_widget`), it is assigned a name.

> The name is created by concatenating the widget name and the plugin name in brackets, like this: `"widget_name (plugin_name)"`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The name is created by concatenating the widget `display_name` from the plugin manifest and the plugin name in parenthesis, like this: `"Widget name (plugin_name)"`. Note: this is the same name that is shown in the napari menus and the title bar of the widget.
```
I was confused by the underscore, thinking it could be the Python name.

### Warnings 

> Many plugins use the `viewer.window._dock_widgets` attribute to access `QtViewerDockWidget` widgets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many plugins use the private `viewer.window._dock_widgets` attribute to access `QtViewerDockWidget` widgets.
```

> ### Warnings 
> 
> Many plugins use the `viewer.window._dock_widgets` attribute to access `QtViewerDockWidget` widgets.
> It is an internal API and may stop working on any release 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```{important}
We don't recommend using the `viewer.window._dock_widgets` attribute to access `QtViewerDockWidget` widgets. This is a private, internal API and may stop working on any release. Please use the above described public API instead.
```
````
How about making this an admonition?

## Shared state between widgets

> If you need for multiple widgets to share the state, you can use a shared global object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need for multiple widgets to share state, you can use a shared global object.
```

```python 

from psygnal import EventedModel

class GlobalState(EventedModel):
    """A global state object that can be shared between widgets."""
    # Define your shared state attributes here
    some_value: int = 0
    another_value: str = "default"
    

GLOBAL_STATE = None

def get_global_state():
    """Get the global state object, creating it if it does not exist."""
    global GLOBAL_STATE
    if GLOBAL_STATE is None:
        GLOBAL_STATE = GlobalState()
    return GLOBAL_STATE
```

If you need to be sure that state is related to a specific viewer, you can use the `viewer` as a dictionary key:

```python
from weakref import WeakKeyDictionary

from psygnal import EventedModel

class GlobalState(EventedModel):
    """A global state object that can be shared between widgets."""
    # Define your shared state attributes here
    some_value: int = 0
    another_value: str = "default"

GLOBAL_STATE = WeakKeyDictionary()

def get_global_state(viewer):
    """Get the global state object for the given viewer, creating it if it does not exist."""
    if viewer not in GLOBAL_STATE:
        GLOBAL_STATE[viewer] = GlobalState()
    return GLOBAL_STATE[viewer]
```

> To store state between sessions, you can enhance the `get_global_state` to load state from drive or database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To store state between sessions, you can enhance the `get_global_state` to load state from persistent storage, such as a drive or database.
```

    another_value: str = "default"

GLOBAL_STATE = None

def get_save_path():
    """Get the path to save the global state."""
    from napari.settings import get_settings

    return Path(get_settings().config_path).parent / "plugin_name" / "state.json"

def get_global_state():
    """Get the global state object, creating it if it does not exist."""
    global GLOBAL_STATE
    if GLOBAL_STATE is None:
        save_path = get_save_path()
        if save_path.exists():
            # Load the state from the file
            try:
                with save_path.open('r') as f:
                    GLOBAL_STATE = GlobalState.model_validate_json(f.read())
            except ValidationError:
                # If loading fails, create a new global state
                logging.exception("Failed to load global state from file, creating a new one.")
                GLOBAL_STATE = GlobalState()
        else:
            # Create a new global state if the file does not exist
            GLOBAL_STATE = GlobalState()
        GLOBAL_STATE.events.connect(save_global_state)  # Connect the save event to the global state on change
    return GLOBAL_STATE

def save_global_state(event):

>     """Save the global state to a file."""    # Serialize the state to a file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    """Save the global state by serializing it to a file."""
```
